---
date: 2020-03-26
title: Devlog 11 - Budgeting and Bookkeeping
---
This devlog contains links to the presentation that I made for the March 30th seminar, 4.1. Budgeting and Bookkeeping. The presentation is exceedingly long, so I included a summary of the two readings at the end of each section. 
- Presentation link [here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1hvJ8BjvjhcbtH9qQIjhvOAhY6ri185Wmu97MqG46NKM/edit?usp=sharing)
- Links to notes I took on the readings, as well as my sources [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/17ztDaeVHleLo_s_Bih3OLMq5WLqt6O3NCG6RnuDA-aU/edit?usp=sharing)
  - The reading notes also follow in this devlog, if you wish to annotate.

**Notes on the Readings**
**Skinner, Sarah J., Robert B. Ekelund, and John D. Jackson. “Art Museum Attendance, Public Funding, and the Business Cycle.” The American Journal of Economics and Sociology 68, no. 2 (2009): 491-516.**

**Introduction**
- Almost all museums in the U.S., especially art museums, faced major problems in all of their many functions. The U.S. has not provided high and increasing support for their museums.
- Many museums are under “cost crunches” due to increasing operating expenses, and must look to corporations, individuals, and income from operations to finance these costs through endowments and direct gifts, as well as to government support at all levels.
- Museum officials are never certain of their expected revenue streams, and therefore complex, long-term planning becomes more difficult.
- The state of the economy, the political make-up of Congress, tax incentives, and the charitable nature of museum supporters, along with many other factors, affect donation and contribution levels.
- An often unrecognized problem exists: museum attendance, which could be countercyclical, while federal and other subsidies to museums follow the business cycle.
- This is a problem because efficient support for museums and their patrons requires museum funding (a factor affecting supply), especially by the government, is positively correlated with attendance (demand). Essentially, a problem emerges when attendance falls with a rise in income, and rises with a drop in income.
- If attendance is high, but the government and other agencies decide not to allocate funds due to not having them available.
- If attendance is low, and the government allocated funds, but decide not to allocate more because attendance is low.

**Federal Support as a Proxy**
- Two separate funding agencies for museums were established in 1965, the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) and the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH).
- In the mid-1960s, grants from corporations, foundations, and other government agencies to the arts rapidly increased.
- But arts funding has fluctuated greatly over time.
- Idea in the early 1980s that individual income tax cuts would increase disposable income, and cause private contributions to art museums and other charitable donations. Yet federal support remained in the form of NEA and NEH subsidies.
- Public support of art and culture takes place mainly through the NEA, the NEH, and the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS). State and local governments also provide support through annual appropriations that may include general operating support.
- These appropriations are often channeled through state and local arts councils.
- Museums may also receive a considerable indirect subsidy from local governments in the form of exemption from local property tax payments.
- Other privileges that some museums enjoy from their nonprofit status are sales tax exemptions on certain items sold in museum gift shops and reduced postal rates for mailings.
- A Proxy-Indicator of Museum Funding: While federal support is often exceeded by state and local government agencies by a rate of 8x, federal funding is an important indicator because:
- There is only one federal government, with only a few agencies relating to art museums, compared to the many existing at other levels of government.
- Granting agencies at lower levels appear to adopt criteria set by federal agencies in making their own grants, and also have seen federal grants as an indicator of quality.
- Therefore, federal agencies create a “crowding-in” effect (Crowding in, federal spending can trigger further spending by other levels of government, and non government bodies). 
- Also amplified by the “matching requirements” of NEA And NEH funding, where grants cannot be more than one-half of the cost of a project.
- Therefore, the influence of federal funding is more important than the actual dollar values of the funding.

**Public Funding of the Arts and the Business Cycle**
- Funding of the arts has never been a priority of the U.S. government, it has always been part of discretionary funding (what is left after basic government projects and services have been funded). Therefore, the funding is pro-cyclical, and will increase during “boom” periods and decrease during “bust” periods.
- Many other private sources of funding - corporations, foundations, individuals, and endowments follow this pro-cyclical pattern, magnifying the effects on museum revenues.

**Business Cycles and Art Museum Attendance**

**Measuring Museum Output**
- It is difficult to measure the output of a museum.
- Museums provide a service, which is hard to measure
- Museum output is provided, partly, by the public sector (partial public goods). The number of “consuming units”, i.e. visits to a museum, are used as outputs. Therefore, cultural benefits attributable to museums must increase with attendance, so attendance = output.

**Data Sources: Calculating Attendance**
- There is no data on aggregate museum attendance in the U.S., this article provides an estimate using the creation of an index. This is then checked with an NEA survey which has a question about museum attendance.
- Through the correlation of attendance with economic activity, the question is: is attendance procyclical or countercyclical?
- Aggregate Art Museum Attendance and Aggregate Economic Activity
- Has to be an estimate due to lack of data; transfer function (models the device's output for each possible input). 
- The results find that museum attendance tends to be countercyclical.

**The Policy Conundrum**
- As museum attendance is countercyclical to economic activity, there is a policy problem where museums cannot be appropriately funded over time. 
- But is there an actual empirical foundation to this conundrum? 
- Funding and Attendance: The Problem of Causality
- Is there a statistical relationship between aggregate museum attendance and federal funding of art museums?
- According to the equations, attendance causes funding and not conversely. Therefore, problems for museums would not be solved by short-term adjustments.
- The results also confirm the procyclical nature of real government revenues.
- Income and Substitution Effects: A Possible Explanation
- When income is increasing, the supply of funding for museums may be available due to the procyclical nature of government revenues, but at the same time, the countercyclical nature of attendance causes the appearance of reduced museum demand. 
- Decreases in income result in increased attendance and hence increased funding demand, but the pro-cyclical nature of government expenditures indicates that the federal funds are not likely to be available.
- The question remains: why does museum attendance rise with reductions in income? 
- Consider other forces: 
  - The possibility that those unemployed or underemployed will place a lower value on time per hour/per day.
  - Leisure may increase, depending on how price and choice interact over a wide range of substitutes.
  - Therefore, the negative income effect on the museum attendance may be overwhelmed by the positive substitution effect on - demand of a reduced value of time, which can cause increased museum attendance.

**Conclusions and Policy Implications**
- Each museum’s mix of funding sources is different, depending on a number of factors and support. The procyclical nature of federal funding may affect some museums more than others, depending on size of endowments, locale, public or private status, etc.
- Is there a reasonable policy alternative to circumvent the issue of attendance being countercyclical to federal funding, which is procyclical?
- A complementary approach would be to base art museum funding decisions on a planning horizon that includes the full business cycle rather than only the financial (fiscal) year.
- Specific appropriations within government budgets and/or within the NEA.
- Longer term funding would alleviate the problem of matching demand for museums with their funding.



**Toepler, Stefan. “Caveat Venditor? Museum Merchandising, Nonprofit Commercialization, and the Case of the Metropolitan Museum in New York.” Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations 17, no. 2 (2006): 99-113.**

**Introduction**
- Commercialization: Nonprofit managers relying less on donations, and focusing on fees for related services, sales of goods and services, and other forms of earned rather than contributed income.
- Two strands of arguments:
  - Adoption of commercial means and mechanisms is a positive development; leads to greater efficiency and new and innovative ways of addressing protracted social problems.
  - Decline of private and public contributed revenues has forced reluctant nonprofit managers to seek commercial-like income sources to sustain growth and meet societal needs. Charging fees and selling goods only cross-subsidizes (charging higher prices to one type of consumer to artificially lower prices for another group) the collective good provision.
- Therefore, nonprofit managers may be distracted from the pursuit of their mission in lieu of making profit.
- This paper studies the Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York, NY) to suggest there are a number of key generalized assumptions underlying both points of view that require closer evaluation.
- Use of a case study to search for counterfactual evidence.

**Assumptions underlying the commercialization debate**
- First, on historical roots: it is often accepted that commercialization began in the 1980s.
- Prior to that, nonprofits (and their services) were largely funded through private philanthropy, and in the post-war and 1960s, government funding was increasingly prevalent. Then, in the 1980s, federal funding sharply fell, despite increasing needs and nonprofit services. Also, private philanthropy did not compensate for the funding gap due to the needs-based growth of nonprofit programs.
- Therefore, it forced nonprofits to rely increasingly on program and other-market based revenues. 
- It is true that there is little evidence to show that they undertook commercial ventures in substantial ways before the 1980s.
- Second: This assumes that commercial activities are pursued to generate new resources to offset declining donative income in an effort to cross-subsidize mission-related activities, as there is little point in undertaking these activities otherwise.
- However, the issue of efficiency of commercial activities is typically not much thematized, so this idea has gone largely unquestioned.
- This does not mean that nonprofit commercial ventures are achieving their goals.
- Most business ventures fail within the first few years, nonprofit ones may be the same.
- Business planning is not widely employed in the nonprofit sector (and even less so in the arts) and commercial undertakings may not be based on sound planning.

**Commercialization and the Arts**
- Until the 1960s, high cultural institutions (e.g. museums and orchestras) remained tightly controlled and financially dependent on local urban elites. Wealthy patrons had control plus institutions had substantial municipal appropriations. 
- In the 1960s, private foundations became more systematically involved in funding the arts.
- In 1965, the federal government established the National Endowment Fund for the Arts (NEA), and spurred the development of new state and local level public funding agencies.
- The 1970s saw the rise of new public and private funding mechanisms that began to diminish the role of local elite patrons and municipalities. State and local government continued to grow.
- However, federal funding began to stagnate in the 1980s, and private grants and giving did not keep up.
- Museums have long resisted mixing commerce with their activities, since the 1970s to today.
- The perceived commercialization of museums beginning in the 1980s was driven by the expansion of merchandising, and the increase in retail activities not greeted with unanimous approval.
- Throughout the 1990s, as commercialization picked up pace, museums tried other forms of commercialization, including the raising of admission fees where feasible, merchandising appeared to have become a strategy of choice.
- Expanded on-site store space, developed off-site shops in shopping malls, and took merchandising onto the online space. 

**Data and methodology**
- Extent of commercialization is difficult to trace due to lack of data.
- Typically have to rely on highly aggregated Census Data, IRS form 990 information or survey data, with significant limitations.
- This paper tries to trace these developments through the Annual Reports of the Metropolitan Museum of Art from 1960-2002, which also has limitations due to the reporting style changing in 1980.

**Charting the Metropolitan Museum’s revenue structure**
- Commercial activities include admissions, and “auxiliary services” (the museum shop and other merchandising activities, restaurant and food services, and parking).
-  review of overall revenue suggests a significant commercial transformation. Went up starting in the 1970s due to the emergence of foundation funders, corporate sponsors, and other state and federal government support.
- Throughout the 1970s, the rise of commercial receipts was paralleled by a drop in  endowment income.
  - Considerations:
  - The auxiliary revenue was held in a separate reserve and not available for operating purposes until 1969.
  - Auxiliary revenues are gross revenues, but not net proceeds or profits. This means that for the 1960s, the role of endowment and city subsidies are understated.
  - And from the 1970s onwards, the data does not accurately reflect the relatively importance of auxiliary profits for financing operations. 

**The end of business as usual, 1960-1968**
- Until the late 1960s, the Museum generated revenues in excess of expenses and continued to rely on its two keys of operating revenue: unrestricted endowment funds and city appropriations (totalling over 90% of operating income).
- There was minimal focus in the reports on auxiliary activities. For example, producing art books, prints, and casts of items was viewed as an outreach or educational device.
- The Museum pointed to the problem of rising costs of operations, acquisitions, and building needs. The strategy in the late 1960s was to further develop traditional donative revenue sources. 
- Admission to the Museum was free of charge, and auxiliary income was to be used for further “outreach.”

**The origins of commercialization, 1969-1971**
- Several factors contributed to changing the way the museum would be financed:
  - 1. Preparations for the Centennial Celebration in 1970 (Museum was founded in 1870) accelerated cost pressures.
  - 2. Thomas Hoving was appointed director in 1967, and he aggressively pushed for the acquisition of major private collections as well as a new building master plan that would expand the Museum to the limits of its Central Park Location.
  - Hoving also changed the orientation of the museum towards education and public access (not just a repository of objects).
  - 3. The budgetary problems of NYC during fiscal year 1968-69 led to an announcement of a reduction of support of cultural institutions (later withdrawn). It was a signal that municipal support could not be taken for granted anymore. 
  - 4. The Museum was beginning to feel the onset of the inflation of the 1970s.
  - Inflation, or “stagflation” is often blamed on oil prices, currency speculators, greedy businessmen, and avaricious union leaders. However, it is clear that monetary policies of the government were the cause.
- While the museum was expanding physically and its functions, it became that its current revenue sources would not suffice. The Museum began to reexamine its attitudes:
- Income from auxiliary activities was no longer set aside, and beginning in 1969 were used for operations.
- In 1969 as well, started charging admissions for special exhibitions, and introduced voluntary admissions at the main building.

**The rise of commercialization: 1972-1990**
- Three significant developments forced an ever growing reliance on commercial income:
  - 1. Economic recession and inflation began to undermine the endowment as the biggest source of the museum’s finances, which declined rapidly by mid-decade.
  - The Museum would use an advance of the endowment and a commercial loan in 1978 to build a $3 million shop expansion, which would be repaid from merchandising sales.
  - More of the endowment continued to be used to finance merchandising inventories, parking garage construction, and another bookshop expansion.
  - 2. Despite the recession, expansion plans continued without any signs of scaling back.
  - 3. The limits to self-sustainability were repeated, as the Museum increasingly faced cuts in state aid and reductions in city land subsidies, and NYC refused to fully cover growing maintenance and protection needs of the Museum. 
  - Suggested admission fees were raised in 1976, 77, 80, 81, and 82.
- Limits to self-sustainability showed by the end of the 1970s, as the Museum faced a string of record deficits.
- Important new strategy developed called the “rebuilding the traditional strength of the endowment and its role as the financial heart of the museum” through the capital campaign, Fund for the Met. 
- While the goals of the campaign were met in 1986, it did not cover the Museum’s financial goals, nor did it stop their commercial intentions.
- By the end of the 1970s into the 1980s, the Museum introduced several successful blockbuster exhibitions, to balance the deficit.
- Continued to expand retail operations, including seven off-site stores over three years.

**Reaching the plateau: 1991-2002**
- The Museum in 1991 acknowledged possible limits to growth.
- Declines in the mail-order business, attributed to “industry trends” led to losses in the merchandising operations during the recession of the early 1990s.
- Auxiliary activities were one of the eight major revenue sources, municipal funding was still uncertain, and they continued to be operating in deficit. Still, the Museum continued to expand. 
- The Museum sought foreign ventures, but merchandising operations began to incur a net loss from the mid-1990s to the end of the decade. After briefly bouncing back, merchandising revenues dropped again.
- In relative terms, 2002 merchandising gross revenues dropped down to 40% of total revenues and support—the lowest share since 1975.

**Discussion and conclusion**
- While this was a case study of the Metropolitan Museum, studies show that other museums faced a similar trajectory. 
- In summary, commercialization issue:
  - Nonprofit organizations produce both public and private goods and that managers have pronounced preferences that shape the product mix. 
  - The public good output, such as collection, conservation, and scholarly research in the museum case, is the most preferred, but requires potentially limited donations and subsidies. 
  - To supplement donative support and cross-subsidize the public good provision, nonprofits also produce private goods. Private goods are preferred if closely related to mission, such as admission charges for both the permanent as well as special exhibitions. 
  - Other private goods that are at best indirectly related to the mission, such as auxiliary activities, are non-preferred and will only be produced at a minimum unless donative income and preferred private good provision are insufficient to finance the desired level of public good output. 
  - Once nonprofit managers engage in private good production, there is the possibility that economic and financial considerations begin to override mission considerations and mission displacement may take place.
  - It seems that the Metropolitan Museum fell into this scenario.
- Two issues require further conceptualization in terms of commercialization:
  - 1. Retail and merchandising activities are not easily categorized into preferred and nonpreferred, and public and private.
  - This suggests that “preferability” may change over time.
  - Since the Museum began merchandising for operations revenue, there is no evidence showing they did so for any non-economic reason.
  - Even commercial ventures, which originally developed out of mission-related activity, might eventually turn into something less desirable or preferable.
  - There is nothing necessarily wrong with the “preferredness” of a commercial venture, as long as it serves to sustain the institution, which it did throughout the 1970s and 1980s (broke-even). 
  - Although, auxiliary deficits began to occur in the 1990s.
  - 2. The issue of commercial ventures in terms of downturns and losses, emphasizing the need for contingency plans (such as building reserves to guard against short-term losses, as well as exit strategies). 
Otherwise, diversification can be a bane rather than a boon.

**Discussion questions**
- Do you think museums should be a “core federal responsibility” (essential to society)? How do you define essential?
- Do you think that museums are important politically, economically, socially, overall?
- What are other reasons that attendance increases when funding falls? Do you accept Skinner, Elekund, and Jackson’s explanation (less employment ->  less emphasis on time -> more museum visits)?
- Based on what we have seen in the class, are Canadian museums underfunded the same way, or to the same degree, that American museums are?
- Morally, at what point do you think a national museum deviates from its original purpose (it’s “mission”) through commercialization activities (exhibitions, retail, merchandise, admissions, etc.), if ever? Do you accept Toepler’s explanation of preferred and non-preferred goods?
- In the context of the current COVID-19 crisis, what amount is right to invest into sustaining museums (and the arts more generally)? Should we be focusing on the present or planning for the future?
