---
date: 2020-02-04
title: Devlog 4 - Museum of Science and Technology Visit and Tying it All Together
---
Our visit to the Canada Science and Technology Museum ended our series of initial visits to each museum. To focus on the Science and 
TechMuseum first, our visit mainly focused on historical survey markers, which relate to the concept of power and division of physical 
space.In consideration of the Canadian Landmarks Unearthed webpage, (https://biblio.uottawa.ca/omeka1/dpantalony/canadian-landmarks-
unearthed) we can see that each marker is important to consider in both isolation and in relation to other objects. Each has unique 
physical qualities uses, and provenance - everything has its own history. 

Beyond this, The Ingenium staff mentioned their own problems with some of their objects that has been touched upon by both the Museum of
Nature and the Museum of History: that there are certain objects in their collection that are unlinked to others (e.g. photographs and
geographic markers). Further to this. there are objects that are not in museums, that could be (e.g. material from the Department of 
National Defence, andmaterial from Natural Resources Canada).

In terms of data and accessibility, the Science and Tech Museum seem to be further advanced in terms of making their material accessible 
to the public, evidenced by both their Collection & Research Page on their website, including having Open Data. Of note, it is however 
two years outdated. There is still a need to be able to connect information together across museums and departments. 

Ingenium seems to be relatively well-staffed, and has the capacity to contineu to make progress on this. I did find it interesting that
all three museums are seeking students to do projects in almost untrodden territory - with their proposal of doing a virtual map of
the museum in its past, or a geographic system put together through scanned photographs. It is evident that the Museum of Science and 
Tech is about a step ahead of the other two museums we have visited. 

In tying it all together, this whole course is about both understanding the importance of what makes up a "legitimized" museum's 
systems, narrowing to the importance of objects and their meaning in relation to itself and its relationship with other objects, and 
people. In ensuring that this relationship, which if maintained can give important insights into history, but if lost, cannot easily be 
recovered (or at all), is created and maintained, we need effective practices from the beginning of the accessibility project and 
process.

Lastly, as a side note, at one point during the visit, the process of transferring files from a shared drive onto a new system was
mentioned, in the context of digital asset management. The importance of teaching people, even the museum's own professional staff,
things such as file structure organizations and naming conventions is an issue that I can confidently say exists, to some degree, across
all government departments. I have personally worked in two government departments, one of which has maintained the use of a central 
shared drive (local servers), and other that I have seen transition from CDIM to GCDocs. 

The shared drive that I worked in was a  complete and total disaster due to each person having different naming conventions for saving 
files, as well as different places for saving files. This was compounded by a lack of administrative control over the creation and 
deletion of folders (yes, I have accidentally deleted important folders before, which forced me to initiate a long recovery process 
through the department's IT Services). This system was compounded by the fact that the team I worked in had moved from one department
to another, back to its original department in the span of less than a decade. As a result, during the transfers between systems,
files were corrupted (and still are), and naming conventions changed. For example, people saving things in a folder named after them,
of which today, almost nobody knows. This is the concept of corporate memory, which is often intangible and therefore lost when a person
moves or retires from their team.

When I worked in a department that had CDIM and later GCDocs, which are electronic "library" systems, similar issues occurred, but to
less severe degrees. Both CDIM and GCDocs had the issue of having the ability to enter all the relevant metadata when creating and 
saving a file, (e.g. Name, Date, Description, Tags, Ownershig, etc.), but did not require the user to input anything beyond the name of 
the file. The name of the file itself also had no standards (and no amount of training could stop an employee from misspelling or
otherwise saving a file incorrectly. One major issue with the transfer between CDIM and GCDocs was that some people refused to use
the new system (citing inconvenience, i.e. technological incompetence), and the old system was still accessible. This created a literal
divide between groups of people within the same group. There were no formal repercussions for doing so, people just "worked around" the
issue by sending files through emails (which is often a security risk, something that these systems were supposed to avoid in the first 
place). Another major issue that I noticed was just that in the dumping of files from CDIM to GCDocs, the dates and ownership (the
literal metadata) were defaulted to the date the system was put in place (i.e. July 2019) and the ownership went to a central "Admin."
This essentially obliterated the functionality of searching old files by date or owner. This is problematic because these are issues
that the museums faced, just with a different coat of paint. Many people do not understand the importance of good metadata, and it is
difficult to communicate its importance to people regardless of their background - some just get it and some do not. And trying to
convince them sometimes feels like an insurmountable obstacle. One step at a time I suppose.

With my peers in the class working on the Museum of History, we plan to visit this week (ideally) to get a sense of what to do with that
museum's material. With each museum, there is so much that could be done with the material, and our group needs to start working towards
shaping what a final project may look like. Until then, I remain in a state of fear and excitement.
