---
date: 2020-03-24
title: Devlog 10 - The Potential of Data, and COVID-19 Racism
---
It has been about a week since classes have been moved to being completely online. I am finding it difficult to balance everything. For this project on the Fort Frontenac cards, it has definitely been moving slowly, and obviously we are not going to get as much done as we maybe envisioned, but that is how it is going to be. Currently, we need to fix the outputs of the handwriting software (it is not perfect), which is error correction plus transcription work. Basically, it just needs time, something that a lot of people do not have. I am sure a lot of students are experiencing this, but for me, exams and projects at the end of the term do not dissapear due to the virus. In fact, life has been made more difficult due to having to self-teach the material for each course, ontop of using the self-taught material in the assignments and online tests that are happening at the end of the term. It is my last semester, but it feels like I am crawling towards the finish line.

So in terms of the readings for this week, I usually try to connect it to my own experience in government, but it is a pretty loose connection this time. On the reading themselves, the general takeaway is similar to what we have learned in the course already - that data does not exist in isolation. Data is a process, or a medium (Chad Weinard, 2019) that has a lot of potential, when used well, to expose the connections that objects (digital and physical) have with one another, and how they develop over time. The other readings relate to creative ways that data has been manipulated, as a tool, to serve other purposes - they are essentially showcases encouraging people to be creative. I cannot comment much on the actual practical creations of the Generominos (Kate Compton, 2018), generative heritage (Mitchell Whitelaw, 2014), or fake news (Max Woolf, 2019), other than they are "cool." 

In the most practical sense, it is necessary to consider the risks that data, because it is powerful, when used by the wrong people in the wrong means. I suppose most relevant now is COVID-19, the panic that it is causing (which for some is worse than the actual risk of death), and the ways that people are able to manipulate messaging around it for their own purposes. Right now, the whole world is vulnerable, and there are people that try to take advantage of it. For example, due to panic buying, people have bought out whole store's supplies of hand sanitizer and cleaning wipes, and try to price gouge people. 

For the government and the societal side, I think something that comes up is racism against Chinese people (or anyone that looks remotely East Asian). It is an interesting phenomenon because Asian businesses are failing due to "covidiots" not understanding the virus. I read somewhere something like this "I don't need to self-quarantine after travelling because the plane I was on didn't have any Asians on it." Ah... That's certainly something. 

I largely work on anti-racism-related activities, and it has been interesting seeing how anti-Asian sentiment is a concern. To put it in perspective, previous data generally points to East Asians being (among) the most prosperous minorities in Canada and the United States. This could certainly change. There is certainly a need for messaging to correct misconceptions about COVID-19, to dispel myths about this virus. The only issue, and this extends broadly to "solving" racism, is that there are always folks that do not listen - and these folk tend to be the loudest and least educated.

When I think about the potential of data to help address these issues, I would hope that some government entities are actively looking at ways to use data to counteract disinformation online. Perhaps a group like the Canada Centre for Community Engagement and Prevention of Violence (https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/bt/cc/index-en.aspx) are leading something like this - it would be good to know. Other than that, what I would suggest is that based on collected data of people's browsing habits on major sites such as Facebook and YouTube, that something like what the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is already doing would be relevant. PHAC is putting banners on all the videos that it detects as related to the virus, redirecting people to here: https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/diseases/coronavirus-disease-covid-19.html?utm_campaign=not-applicable&utm_medium=vanity-url&utm_source=canada-ca_coronavirus. Something similar could be done for disinformation.

One more thing, if we were to take this a step further, and this would be crossing the gray ethical line, but manipulating Search Engine Optimization (for web traffic) is something that is very powerful. For example on YouTube, if someone were to search "coronavirus" or its related common terms, the first results that pop up could be relating to dispelling myths around the virus. Or perhaps, when searching on Facebook (a goldmine for misinformation due to minimal moderation and the sheer amount of user created, but also low effort/low barrier-to-entry content) for coronavirus, there could be a disclaimer with a link about disinformation. Anyway, who knows, something like this could already be going on. All I can say is that I acknowledge the potential and dangers that data has, to affect people's thoughts and opinions. People have to remember, emotion almost always "trumps" logic, especially in times of distress. It opens up the world itself to major changes (such as the creation of online learning material; accomodations for teleworking; or in a wider sense, the bolstering of a social safety net), but such changes could make society worse or better (such as political polarization and economic downturn).

I suppose I have a lot of time to think about things like this while I am stuck at home for at least a couple of weeks, maybe months. We will see.
