---
date: 2020-03-06
title: Devlog 7 - Universal Metadata!
---
I do not have any particular thoughts about this week's class on APIs, because we simply are not there yet, so I am trying to not think about it for now.

So our group, after much speculation, has agreed upon a set of universal metadata that we would have for the Fort Frontenac excavation cards. First, we have decided to ignore the drawings on the back in terms of the API for now, hopefully not a decision we regret. The main reason why is because there is not much text that follows any particular pattern compared to the front sides of the cards. Although I wonder if we can integrate the pictures for the Heritage Jam somehow.

So focusing on the front side of the cards, there were a lot of different possiblities for metadata to include. We tried to pick out the most consistently appearing ones that we knew the meaning of. These were: the Borden number (top left, first set of numbers); collection number (top left, second set of letters and numbers); the date collected (top left, dates); date catalogued (top right, dates); item name (mid, first line); material made from (mid, second line); condition (mid, third line); marks (mid(?); if relevant). The most perplexing ones were CONS: N.Y., i.e. conservation status No, Yes (bottom left, any order, sometimes Y circled, sometimes just the word Yes is written); INV, i.e. inventory (bottom left, any order, do they have the object or not); and LOC, i.e. location of object (bottom left, any order). Deciphering the meaning of these things required significant brainstorming and sending photos back and forth. It was definitely interesting but also very necessary to get out of the way.

Well, we made progress... one step at a time I suppose.

Next moves are to make a universal Tropy, assigned to one member, and continue working through a workflow. Something to figure out with the professor. Group members will also have to go back and take photographs eventually as well, if we want to keep the workflow going.
