---
date: 2020-01-19
title: Devlog 1 - Pre-Museum Visit Thoughts
---
Here are my preliminary thoughts on the course and museums prior to the first of the museum visits.

First, prior to starting this course, I had never given a second thought to museums. This largely stems to the fact that I have
only been to museums during elementary school field trips, never on my own accord, and probably for not over a decade. It would 
be to say that I have never been interested in them as a consumer.

Throughout my four years studying history at Carleton, museums have come up occasionally, and in the Canadian context, I have 
always thought of them as a place that has been created by official governments and carefully crafted to present history in a 
specific way. 

From completing my co-op designation and working for the government (in multiculturalism), and having done some public-facing 
work (web content, official statements, letters to citizens), I have generally thought of the current iteration of the 
government as trying to portray history "correctly", but in a softened manner - nothing like how an academic would write about a 
contentious issue. I believed that museums, or any public facing entity, would therefore be similar. I had been told museums are 
problematic, but I never envisioned the extent to which this was true, nor what aspects were problematic.

First, I acknowledge that the definition of what constitutes a museum is disputed. Private-public, physical-digital, and its 
purpose, are important questions to be asked. Most importantly the question of power in the form of control over "cultural 
knowledge" (as described by the Mass Action guide). Essentially, it is important to understand that no space can be neutral; 
museums have their own rules of comportment, yet each person experiences museums differently. As every person's past is 
different, it means each person experiences museums differently, it means that museum spaces are literally and metaphorically, 
zones of debate and discussion.

So then, about the other part of the course - museum informatics, an entirely new concept. We learned that having metadata, or 
information about data, is important to understanding objects used in museums. Who has possessed an object is one important 
aspect, as well as how the function of the object has changed through its possession (or ownership, which is another major issue 
surrounding objects in museums, for example for of Indigenous people's objects). These histories add value to an object. All 
objects in museums are interconnected to another, meaning that the more information we lack about an object, the more we do not 
know about their relationship in an  interwoven system of objects. The amount of information about an object severely limits or 
enables what knowledge someone is able to extract during a museum visit. 

As indicated in "Museum Informatics" by Rayward and Twidale, the changing world of information technology has changed museums in 
different ways - their organization, what they are meant to do, and how. Crafting a public-facing museum is exceedingly complex.
The network of people, information and technology involved is extensive. 

So then, I am writing this Devlog the night before the museum visit. We were asked in class, what do we want to get from this 
course? Personally, I have no idea what I wanted to get out of this course, it just seemed interesting. Looking at the Canadian 
Museum of History's website, it is about what I expected: it is simple, trying to draw the reader's attention and ultimately 
convince them to buy tickets and visit. It has a large variety of exhibitions, being able to tell a wide variety of stories.

When I consider what information I would be able to get from the website as a researcher, there seems to be minimal I can do
online. I clicked on the Learn tab, and learned that they have Publications - which you click to buy, and a research database.
I clicked on their database and clicked randomize, bringing me to Mirrors. https://www.historymuseum.ca/collections/search-
results/?q=mirror&page_num=1. There were just a lot of mirrors, almost none with sufficient metadata. Cheval mirror: no date, no 
event associated with it, no affiliation, no maker, no place of origin...not useful. Of course there are objects that have
fullsome descriptions in the database as well. The questions I raised were: what is the process in which an object is processed
at the museum to be inputted into the database? Was there no further research attempted to get more data about the object? Would 
I infact get more information if I were able to physically see the object in-person, and in that vein, is it merely a question
of the digital presence of the museum being weaker/not cared for as much as the physical experience (a fairly common occurance
on some official government webpages)? 

Throughout this course, I doubt that all of my questions will be answered, but perhaps a few will. I do not know what to expect
from the museum visits and the rest of the course, but I am excited, but also terrified.
