---
date: 2020-01-27
title: Devlog 3 - Museum of Nature Visit
---
Today, we visited the Museum of Nature's Natural Heritage Campus. There were a lot of similarities between the Museum of Nature 
and the Museum of History in terms of tough spots. It seems that universally across government, based on my own experiences, and 
what I have heard from the museum staff at both museums, that there is often a disconnect between those making decisions and the 
people that are actually dealing with the archival material/collections. Something that jumped out at me was the difference in opinion about digitization. For example, the idea that if there is already the data on floppy disks, then the paper versions can 
be destroyed. 

Other problems were created in the split between the museums in the 1960s, which caused issues with who got which
collection, that is unresolved today. Both museums indicated the issues with collections not speaking with each other (broken
connections), that can persist due to an arbitrary decision made decades or centuries ago (social vs. archeological data). This 
circles back the central issue of data - what is kept and not kept over time due to changing opinions of what is useful can 
cause major problems for people that interact with material and records in the future.

Speaking of future issues, one thing that stood out again, was the issue of digitization. In both museums, it seems that there
are not many staffs working with the material - it feels like they would not be able to digitize things at the pace that they
come in. Regardless, the central issue is that the medium for digitization changes every few years - is there a permanent 
solution to make material fully accessible to the public? Not currently, but hopefully in the future, as we have only had the 
ability to digitize things for a couple of decades now.

It was mentioned that there are seven databases that the museum is trying to roll into one, and that in itself
says a lot about accessibility. I see it as an issue on two fronts - one is actual accessibility, but the other is making people
care enough (such as to receive funding) about making material accessible. They go hand-in-hand, because so few people, can only
do so much. For me, the question is really: how do I make people care about accessibility to material? Good data facilitates
people's access, so that's one part, but how do we actually entice people to care and participate?

In the realm of "caring," I refer to another example, one that I am more familiar with: the issue with anti-racism initiatives: 
(https://www.canada.ca/en/canadian-heritage/campaigns/anti-racism-engagement/anti-racism-strategy.html). In the anti-racism 
field, the Canadian government can target three specific groups: people who already care about anti-racism; people who are on 
the fence about racism (i.e. ignorant); and people who are actively racist. The issue is, in our world, where funding is limited 
and contested, the government would choose to target those who are on the fence, in terms of efficiency of spending. Why? 
Because people who are not racist, we do not need to care about, and people who are actively racist, we cannot realistically 
target  them, especially when funding is sometimes limited by which party is in power every four years (or about two during a 
minority  government). Using this long-winded metaphor to think about accessibility of archival material to the public, I see a 
similar dilemma. People that already interacted with material despite antiquated and convoluted systems are already part of the 
converted. As public servants have said to me, "there's no point in preaching to the converted." As for those who have no 
interest in the material in the first place, does accessbility change their lack of interest? Probably not. Therefore, it would 
come down to enticing those who are on the fence - who kind of care but would be "converted" into participating by digitization.

Both the Museum of History and the Museum of Nature have a lot of similar problems, and I am not particularly surprised. 
However, I also have no idea what the solutions are, other than that good data is probably the starting point to a solution. I
would be interested to see if the Museum of Science and Technology face entirely different issues, but I suspect it does not.
