---
date: 2020-04-05
title: Devlog 12 - Last Devlog - A Forced Digital World
---
I am sure that the course was supposed to end on a different note, and that all of these readings were planned to lead-up to the HeritageJam, but other worldly circumstances shifted the course dramatically. I'm sitting here reflecting on these last two readings by Kelly and Seneler, and for the last time, here's my take on the readings based on my own experience.

When I reflect on the reading by Seneler on learning styles and cultural backgrounds, I can only agree that museum folk and any sort of public-serving institutions will need to continue to adapt to a changing environment. In this course, we have discussed a lot about the changing physical to digital world, but we have not yet discussed another aspect: changing cultures in society. Fun fact: "[Over one-fifth (21.9%) of Canada's population was foreign born in 2016, up from 19.8% in the 2006 Census and 20.6% in the 2011 National Household Survey (NHS). Statistics Canada projects this could reach between 24.5% and 30.0% by 2036 ... In 2016, Canada was home to 250 ethnic origins. European countries accounted for 75% of all Canadian immigrants in 1966, 16% in 2010 and 11.6% in 2016. In 2016, Asian countries accounted for 7 of the top 10 countries of birth of recent immigrants in 2016. 13.4% of recent immigrants were born in Africa.](https://www.canada.ca/en/canadian-heritage/corporate/publications/evaluations/multiculturalism-program.html)" That is to say, Canada's demographics continue to shift, primarily because it relies so heavily on immigration (and most Canadians are accepting of immigrants due to their economic benefits). 

Currently, from the federal government side (as well as most provincial and some municipal ones), services are mandated to be offered in English and French (the two Official Languages under the Official Languages Act), but some government bodies, and a lot of non-government bodies have begun to offer services in other common languages, such as Mandarin Chinese, Arabic, Hindi, and many more. It becomes more interesting when these services are adapted to fit the nuances of particular cultures. It is not an easy thing and requires significant commitment - both time and resources, but certainly, it is necessary. There is a wider conversation that is possible on the idea of diversity and multiculturalism versus integration and assimilation, and the direction governments take things shifts depending on who is in power. Regardless, it is undeniable that Canada's demographics will continue to shift drastically in only a couple of decades, and it will be the responsibility of the private and public sector to adapt, and cater to its new consumer base, it is only a matter of how they do it.

Now, onto the second article on the post-digital visitor, I will merely say that I agree the way that people learn continues to shift, and we do not really know where it will settle or slow down. The motivating factors for this shift have to do with new technologies and their widespread accessibility (i.e. based on price and regional availability), but also based on innovators (first out of the gate) who set the stage. There is certainly significant room for change. 

So in our current context, digital learning has certainly been difficult for a lot of people - students and professors alike. It was a sudden shift with a lot of bumps, requiring significant accomodation (such as the SAT/UNSAT system). I hope that at the end of it, when (if?) things normalize, that experimenting with online learning tools and formats has some kind of long-lasting effect in the way that we learn. I think there is a lot of potential, and not all of it can be realized because people are often having to deal with non-school related things (for those vulnerable, including a lot of students, and other non-essential workers, this would be economic survival in the face of unemployment). Regardless, I think delivering material at digitally has its merits, and is certainly different from in-classroom learning, but it would require both the need, but also the want for online learning. For both of these, educators and students need to be convinced of its usefulness. Maybe this epidemic will have something to do with that.

And then, in terms of the federal government, this pandemic has been a whole other beast. Some departments have gone totally online (no physical building access allowed, with guards to make sure of that fact), while others are requiring (or as some would say, "forcing") their staff to come in. For those who are teleworking all days a week now, there are several issues that arise. One, which requires further exploration, just as digital learning does, is the differences between being in the office and working remotely. It is such a drastic difference in workflow that you do not realize until you are fully into it (or "missing" being in the office). Most public servants say that they not as productive as they are in the office, while others say they are more productive working from home. There are a lot factors that can be applied to how people learn digtally as well. What I am talking about is the physical setup that people have that allow them to work remotely. This includes both their technological setup (and internet connection), as well as their physical surroundings (e.g. things that distract, and other things that help one focus), as well as their state of mind. It is essentially just a different case for everyone - just with digital learning, each person will have different preferences. Therefore, it is important to have flexibility (as in, for the vast majority of people, it is not meant to be all days a week), which we do not have in the current state of the world. I suppose we also see what happens when we force the work and school world to be entirely digital without alternatives - serious problems occur. 

One "fun" problem in the government setting is network capacity (or the lackthereof of IT infrastructure), due to not anticipating/intending to have every employee work remotely all days a week. This results in limited or no network access for some staff. And yes, when you pose the question "what can you do without network access?" The answer is: not much. It is a problem that is unsurprising, but still dissapointing, because it conforms to people's beliefs that government is always years behind the private sector. Obviously, a stereotype, but in the digital realm, it seems to be accurate, based on what we have seen during the course and based on my own observations.
