---
date: 2020-02-11
title: Devlog 5 - The "Real" Beginnings of the Museum of History Project
---
This devlog will briefly cover the class discussion, but mainly focus on the beginnings of work on the project. In brief, we learned through the
readings and class discussion about two contentious topics - ownership and authority, and preservation (and curation). There were
various discussions surrounding who should own an object, and whether a digital object can take the place of a digital one 
(Beaulieu and De Rijcke); what determines authority and the balance between a museum encouraging user engagement and a museum 
maintaining its legitmacy as an institution (Lashaw and Orantes); and, the need for digital preservation and the difficulties 
surrounding it Hennessy et al.). We looked at various case studies to tie these concepts together.

When considering our own project for the Museum of History, evidently, we are at the beginning stages of being able to even be
able to strongly consider some of the concepts, and it can be said that we as a group, or Carleton as an institution, has no
real say into the museum's actual affairs (or what they want to do with the projects). The purpose of our involvement was just
to gain access to their material, but they ultimately have the authority to do whatever they want. 

Evidently, it would seem like we do not pose a challenge to the museum's authority, at all. That is to say, whether our project 
were to fail or succeed would not affect the museum's ability continue its operations (failure would not help, but it would not for 
example, cause their funding to drop). Essentially, our project is like extracurricular, but could be innovative enough that it may 
actually end up helping the museum's future informatics efforts (if they so choose to be helped). 

In terms of digital preservation, that is definitely our primary goal at this stage. As a group, we have the power to dictate
what metadata we constitute as useful to keep (workflow or paradata) in the process of digitization. This brings me to my next
point, what we have actually done so far. Our group, and Professor Graham, visited the Museum of History for the first time
after the initial touring of the three museums was done. We went to see (a chunk of) the Fort Frontenac excavation collection that
the museum now has ownership of. Evidently, they did not really know what they had, and none of it has been digitized yet. 

Therefore, our first steps were, as I have been told, very par for the course, which is sitting at a table and taking photos of
of handwritten cards. To briefly describe this process - there were unexpected, physical limitations. First was the sheer volume of
cards compared to the amount of people available to photograph them. Two was just that it was tiring (including hand cramps!). 
Three was that people essentially ran out of battery on their phones (I learned that taking several hundred photos drains your 
battery from full to nill in a matter of hours), and I was not going to lug around a heavy power bank while taking photos.
Essentially, based on the museum's closing time, there was no way we were going to take photos of everything, but between the
three members of our group, we probably have over a thousand photographs, more than enough for a starting point.

After gathering an indiscriminate amount of photographs, the next steps are where it is supposed to get innovative though, which is 
uploading the photos taken to Tropy, and manually typing in (and grouping) metadata. This is the next step that will definitely
take a while. I will attempt to work on this over the reading week, but it is unclear how long it will take to do so with my
own batch (I have approximately 400 photographs to sort through). 

The next steps after that will be learning how to get the handwriting recognition software to work, but that is to come later.
My approach is that it is a one step at a time process, in order to not get overwhelmed. I recognize that it is important to
plan ahead, but almost anything could happen at this point, so I will just try my best and go with the flow.
