---
date: 2020-03-09
title: Devlog 8 - Reflections on Metadata and Paradata
---
In consideration of this week's class on metadata, paradata, these are topics that we have come across many times prior to this point in the course, including being told that the devlogs are examples of paradata. In talking about metadata, I have already said before that the government, at least the limited set of groups I have worked for, do not keep good metadata, nor do most public servants understand its importance. All of the functions of metadata, ranging from creation, use, to disposal, are not considered enough important enough for most. I have already written about digital metadata, but briefly, there are a lot of issues with naming conventions (standards vary from team to team due to siloing), and there are even greater issues getting people to enter such information when they save files in the network drive or in GCDocs. This can be said to be a result of short-term mindsets, which do not consider the future use cases of the metadata. I have also said this before, but a lot of government relies on corporate memory, either a long-standing employee that knows the location and contexts of the files, because there for sure is little documentation telling you how to actually use the file management system. In a system that does not use GCDocs, and just uses a shared drive, there is little that I can or am able to do to support better metadata. In literally using Windows Explorer (File Explorer), there are no fields to enter any form of metadata. You are limited to the title of the document you are labeling. Search functionality is also as slow as possible due to Windows indexing. Even if there were fields for metadata, there are still no standard conventions to follow. Employees in the past have proposed file management folders and hierarchies, but these were never put into action due to not enough management interest. As long as the work gets done, it seems that the status quo is acceptable.

When talking about physical metadata, there is a lot of paper in government, and it tends to be stuffed in a drawer somewhere and never looked at again. I suppose to actually further elaborate on this issue, I have to discuss the concept of security classification (https://www.tpsgc-pwgsc.gc.ca/esc-src/protection-safeguarding/niveaux-levels-eng.html). Briefly, especially with physical information, things of higher security classifications (Protected C(?) and above) should not be stored, would have to be disposed of. The only thing that would be kept for higher security documents are the final versions (which I am guessing would be kept at Treasury Board or Finance). So then, the process, or the paradata, is all meant to be destroyed. The metadata itself, how little existed in the first place, is also destroyed (shredded). It is essentially to say that the most important documents, such as the things that are Secret or Top Secret, have to be destroyed instead of preserved. I do not know enough to say that the merits of metadata and paradata are in direct conflict with government security practices.

I ostensibly do not have much else to add about metadata in terms of the CMH project, I can only hope that we are making the right decisions. We have talked in this course about unintended consequeneces, but these are also consequences that can are unseen. In learning how to "do" history, we find are often told not to think about "what ifs" because they are meaningless to historians that should be focusing on analyzing "the facts." Therefore, there are a lot of what-ifs that come up with this kind of project, and we do not know how decisions will spiral into consequences when there are so many unknowns. I understand the importance of keeping process notes because they will inform you about how things ended up the way they are. 
