---
date: 2020-01-20
title: Devlog 2 - Post-Museum of History Visit Thoughts
---
These are my thoughts about the course after participating in the first museu visit, to the Canadian Museum of History.

What stood out me most was what I wrote about there being a stark difference between the digital and physical presence of the museum.
When the resource centre staff talked about the idea of "access" being what their work was, they mentioned that even if they can digitize
many things, if it is not accessible to their audiences - then it is pointless. Notably, this is a very specific view of the purpose
of museums - some form of democratic knowledge sharing.

Another remark I can make is that I was not aware about exactly how many objects this museum had (millions!), and how much of a nightmare 
it is to track all of them effectively. The part about the pre-1998 legacy data not being represented in the public-facing database is 
interesting. The issue of non-numbered or non-located objects is fascinating as well. All of these issues stem from the fact that it is in 
fact humans doing this work, with technology as a tool to facilitate their work. Humans are prone to mistakes, regardless of the years of
experience that they may have had. Some objects, even if they are physically located in the museum space (i.e. storage), can be
considered perpetually lost if they are not tracked properly. 

Again, it is all brought back to the need for proper metadata, in this democratic view of museums as a source of knowledge, learning,
debate, and discussion - that we need to be able to know more about an object to know its signifance in a wider context. 

As one of the students that signed up to work with the Canadian Museum of History's material, I am still unsure what the project is. I
know that is archeological material from the Fort Frontenac dig. I am aware that we will be running into the same problems that the
professionals at the Museum have encountered - with getting handwritten notation onto an accessible digital platform. The real question is:
how exactly are we going to do that?

I remain in a state of both excitement and fear.
