---
date: 2020-02-25
title: Devlog 6 - Reflections on Liberating the Narrative
---
First, to talk briefly about the API collection project. Over the reading week we made progress towards inputting metadata into the pictures we uploaded onto Tropy. The next step is to universalize the metadata, and experiment with the handwriting recognition software. Essentially, our group has to go through a full process cycle to know before taking more pictures. One of the most challenging aspects of this is time itself. Each person is busy with other work, and the closer we get to finals and exams, the more difficult it will be to balance the work, and therefore to make progress.

To speak to the class discussions, again from a government perspective, this course has allowed me to gain a lot of insight into how museums work, and do not work. I found 2.3.: Interpretation to be the most interesting out of the two topics.

In regards to narratives, I am perhaps most familiar with the National Holocaust Monument across from the Canadian War Museum. The in-class discussions about narrative control is interesting because like how one is persuaded to go through a museum a certain way, this is true at a smaller scale for the National Holocaust Monument. Narrative is created in many ways - layout, shapes of walls, relation to other places, plants and rocks outside. As an aside, this monument ran into some controversy, the main one being that none of the initial plaques actually mentioned Jews (in 2017). This was quickly fixed, but it shows how a narrative is carefully crafted and controlled.

So we have seen how the government has tightly created a narrative through the National Holocaust Monument, but a topic that is very important is the topic of “liberating the narrative.” Basically, how can we change a narrative that we deem to be inaccurate or unrepresentative of reality. I want to mainly talk about the realities of government in the face of “idealistic” proposals for change - like the ones we covered in readings and in class. Everything that I say is my opinion, and what I say should never be taken as fact. In fact, I could be, and hope to be, very wrong about what I write.

At one point we talked about the term “genocide” in relation to Canada’s treatment of its Indigenous peoples. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, when he accepted the final report of the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls in 2019, he initially avoided the use of the term “genocide.” He later changed his mind. What does this indicate? I do not have the insight into why Trudeau decided on a position and then changed it later, but what I can say, in relation to attempting to “liberate the narrative,” is that the ball is always in the government’s court. I am not saying this is good or bad, but it is just a reality that we have to accept. In that sense, the power dynamics are not even, and have never been even.

The phrase “The Government of Canada is committed to achieving reconciliation with Indigenous peoples through a renewed, nation-to-nation, government-to-government, and Inuit-Crown relationship based on recognition of rights, respect, co-operation, and partnership as the foundation for transformative change,” represents the current government’s commitments towards Indigenous peoples.

Departments such as Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada advocate for the importance of considering Indigenous perspectives in their work, but the way that this is done is not standardized. While the government has committed to behaving a certain way, it is broad enough that each team has its ability to interpret how to fulfill the commitments, and there are therefore varying degrees of success for these committments. It seems that government will take a long time to give up control over the lives of Indigenous peoples, something they have had a grasp on for hundreds of years. Despite a commitment to Indigenous ways of knowing and doing, actually gauging the viability of lived experience of Indigenous peoples in comparison to their own, established, believed to be legitimate knowledge is another story. Part of the reason for this is likely to be colonialism, but also demographically, there are few public servants in senior management positions. The demographics of the public service is changing with active attempts to hire racialized and Indigenous peoples, but many people would ask why it hasn't happened earlier.

Another issue that seems to pop up in the government is the public's criticism of department's ability to measure impact (in terms of change over-time). There is an inherent difficulty going beyond the measurement of outputs (e.g. money distributed for projects, people reached on social media), especially for what are considered "social initiatives" (i.e. changing people's attitudes). To this extent, a major issue is the government's inability to retain skilled evaluators (as specialists often choose the private sector for greater pay). The government relies a lot on outside contractors, Contractor-government communication can be difficult, and as a result, producing good evaluations can be difficult yet expensive. In some cases, people work for the private sector and exclusively deal with lucrative government contracts, and even when invited to join the government, they refuse, because why would they? The government has no choice but to use their services anyway.

These are just my thoughts, I have not related them at all to museums, but the in-class discussions have led me to think hard, and come to believe that government cannot change as fast as the public wants it to change. To this extent, even if a single department or agency uses a tool or makes a change that seems innovative, there is no guarantee it will spread to widespread usage among other government entities, as government departments are often isolated from each other (they do not see a need to collaborate).

Lastly, there is a need for people to know Canadian history and care about it, or else how are we ever supposed to get anywhere as a nation, if we keep perpetuating mistakes of the past? Now, how to make history engaging and enticing for people, that is where museums play a role.
